---
title: "As Advertised"
date: 2024-03-23T08:47:04-04:00
draft: false
---

I want to tell you a story. It's a story of three laptops assigned to me from
work. But it also might be a story you know because you might have been the
main character at one point or another, laptop or no laptop.

The first laptop was a Chromebook, which was a whole kind of hell I didn't
realize even existed. It had ChromeOS on it, which "allowed" me to enable Linux
development tools, but then promptly froze after it couldn't connect to the
virtual environment.

So I set about exploring what was able to be downloaded on the laptop. The icons
for Google Docs and Google Sheets just opened up the Chrome browser. The Play
Store allowed me to download apps for tablets, which the laptop explicitly was
not - it didn't even have a touchscreen.

When I looked up ChromeOS uses, I found that it was best used for "watching
Netflix" and "surfing the internet." I experimented a bit and found that I
couldn't even download Firefox, which ostensibly would allow me to do the same
things the reviewer said this operating system excelled at.

I guess I should've been unsurprised that ChromeOS would thus expect users to
be okay with being locked into a strict Google ecosystem, with no way out. It
didn't take any great pains to make itself look like a walled garden, as macOS
does, and instead embraced its role as a sterile prison.

So, I asked for a different laptop. They sent me a Geobook from their IT
department, which then failed to even boot - getting stuck in the famed bootloop
cycle I thought I'd left behind after migrating away from the early Windows
operating systems. Since the computer was locked to admins, I couldn't go about
fixing it myself.

It got returned.

The third computer I got was some kind of HP, a little snappier with a
touchscreen. It didn't have great detail - leaving some of the text blurry even
with my glasses on - but it turned on. I could download more than Google Chrome.
By this point I was three weeks into my job and needed to get some work done.

Then, despite apps not being open, I started getting advertisements. From the
operating system, Windows 11. They started clogging up my screen, freezing the
computer until I clicked or dismissed them. After years of being out of the
mainstream operating systems, with popOS as my daily driver, I was
flabbergasted.

How was it okay for me to start getting breaking news on my toolbar every ten
minutes from a news site I didn't even recognize?

The search bar scoured the internet before it thought to look in my files.

Apps that were downloaded by the IT department regularly sent me popups telling
me about the benefits of their technological ecosystem.

My work uses Google suite for everything, so Google Chrome is the defacto
browser. I hadn't yet downloaded Firefox, so put on a bunch of adblockers that I
normally used...only to find that services like YouTube will tell me that I'm
"offline" once they detect them.

It amuses me, in the way that underscores actual concern and not in the humorous
sense, that we were told that these kinds of services were "opt-in". I never
consented to any of this - and I don't think it's any secret that, like most
capitalist practices that reflect rape culture, the creators of these systems
were ever going to wait for an enthusiastic yes. They just had to pretend like
they were interested in our input and pull the rug out from under us when we've
gotten too tired to put up a fight about it anymore. We consented through our
exhaustion under their dogged insistence that we "don't know what we're missing"
or that they could "make us feel good".

I've spent time as a woman. I know how that exact kind of behavior goes. It
doesn't even shock me that these systems, created largely by cis white men,
reflect the way they would treat a woman if they wished to pursue her against
her will.

I've since disabled every single "service" that Windows 11 offers within my
limited understanding of that operating system. The breaking news has been
removed. The search bar has been taken "offline".

For good measure, out of sheer exasperation, I even de-Googled my phone again
and didn't allow microG to set up its limited version of Google services.

It is frustrating that, in order to work around this implicit consent these
services pretend we've given them (while fooling no one) that we have to go to
great lengths to prevent them from getting to us.

Again, to use the rape analogy, femme folks are told that they have to change
how they dress so men don't go after them. I feel like I've taken off my tight
shorts and tank top and traded it for a floor length nun's habit and a veil. If
I want to enjoy the summer heat, i.e.: engage with the internet, I'll have to
swelter underneath all my layers of protection until I get too hot to deal
with it anymore.

The thing is, what we _still_ haven't learned with rape culture as a society
applies here as well: you can't change the behavior of the perpetrator by having
the victims go to these lengths to protect themselves. The perpetrators also
have to understand the flaws in their behavior and what "allows" them to go
about this way unchecked.

I don't have any faith, unfortunately, that those building our computer's
operating systems will "see the light" and understand just how intimately
violating it is to have our devices assault us from the moment we turn them on.

Many of us get that in our day-to-day lives. We don't need our computers telling
us how little personal agency we have as well.

See? I told you that you would recognize yourself as the main character. I just
wish we could opt out of that role too.
