---
title: "Let Google Decide"
date: 2024-10-05T15:08:32-04:00
draft: false
---

## When "personhood" is decided by the Big Five

My partner and I recently moved states in order to benefit from lower rent and a
more affordable living environment. We found a place on Craigslist for the
winter that was not only scam-free, but extremely cute. We visited it in person,
met the landlord, and agreed to tenancy until April after the threat of frost.
The process, despite its rushed quality, was rather straightforward.

However, we started running into problems when we began updating our address.
Google, it seemed, never heard of our road let alone the fact that there were
houses on it.

I first noticed this issue when I went to update my address with my online
credit union. I was told, in no uncertain terms that the street didn't exist
after I overrode the Google Maps autocomplete. When I switched to our PO Box
number, an error message popped up and said that "PO Boxes were not appropriate
addresses."

And so our saga began.

The town, thankfully, knew of the road and gave us no problems when it came to
hyper-local needs like car registration at the downtown office. Signing up for a
new phone service left us both screaming at the computer, then eventually
settling with putting our address as the post office (because, again, PO boxes
aren't "appropriate addresses"). We just hoped that the town being small enough
would make it so they would know where to put mail should something ever come
from the phone company or any other service that used Google to verify
addresses.

Getting a license was also difficult, since mail was rarely delivered to our
physical address. Instead, both of us needed to sign an affadavit...to prove
that the other person lived with us or at least wasn't lying about living in the
state.

Which, when you think about it, is weird, right?

Go in with enough random people to say you lived at a place and that was more
legitimate than a letter with your address on top from a propane company that
served half the state.

The letter, you see, doesn't count because it wasn't a bill with the account
number on it, even though the mysterious street address was. But of course new
tenants wouldn't have a bill with the account number on it yet since they had
only just moved in! Proof of car insurance wasn't enough either because it only
had our mailing address, which is a PO Box...and well, we know what Serious
Institutions think of PO Boxes.

And while we have figured at least some of this out, we also had difficulty
discerning where to begin. Since, to get the PO Box at all, USPS had to know
where we lived and that we had proof of living in the town we wanted the PO Box
at...which caused a headache with Google Maps autocomplete again. Because of
Google, our address wasn't even present for the USPS, who should have more say
than Google about what is and isn't an address! It took a sympathetic postmaster
to help us out in person, since everyone in that office had delivered local mail
to our address previously, so knew we weren't making things up.

This entire debacle is worth mentioning in as full of detail as possible for two
reasons: (1) It shows the extent to which Google can dictate our lives and how
we get to live it. (2) Proof of address is needed for so many things, down to the
basic necessities to be legal within this country.

If I don't have an address, I cannot have a bank account. I cannot get a
driver's license, register my car, vote in my town. I cannot even get a library
card.

For an entire week, I was a non-person to this country's bureaucracy, which in
some respects *should* feel freeing, but in the end was a massive pain in the
ass. It was frightening to consider that something as simple as an address not
showing up on the world's most popular maps app meant that, without the
intervention of locals who understood what it meant to live in a largely
unmarked rural area, this non-personhood would've potentially been permanent.

On a larger scale, it made me concerned for the use of AI in these kinds of
situations. What if I wasn't able to intercept a human postmaster who could then
look at my documents and say that I was able to have a PO Box to receive mail
from outside of town? Or talk to a DMV associate who could see that my partner
was right beside me and could vouch for my legitimacy as a state resident?

Technology, of course, is falliable. It cannot account for all cases, all
possibilities. And forbid the thought of politics entering into it. These tools
can easily be manipulated further to label anyone outside of the white,
heteronormative, cisgender conglomerate as a non-person in the eyes of the
larger system. All they need is a huge company like Google to "not recognize" a
few key factors like whole neighborhoods in redlined areas or a gender marker
(as compared to a birth certificate or something).

If nothing else, I learned that nothing beats talking to a real, live human
being, especially those that are just down the street.
