---
title: "Resisting Bad Resistance"
date: 2023-06-29T14:56:52-04:00
draft: false
---

My mind spills off of rest like oil jumping from a hot pan. When I think about
napping or stopping so-called productive tasks in the name of more relaxing
activities, I am instinctively re-routed to something I "have" to do. Even if
it's empty or busy, I somehow would rather do it than, say, reading or drawing -
even going on a bike ride in my neighborhood. Basically anything I find
pleasurable is off the table.

However, I've been trained to think of these activities as rewards. Not as
things I deserve to do because I love to do them. Even this blog post is being
written because I don't see myself worthy of getting the chance to rest when
it's a "week day" or when there's "already so much to get done."

I've hit many breaking points over the last few years, as several people in my
life have expressed also experiencing. This latest one has started to feel like
a point of no return. There feels like there's a hard nub in my brain right
behind my forehead and it's squeezing. It isn't painful or anything, almost like
a block or drawbridge that's gone up, letting nothing else pass.

No matter what I do, I can't get around it. I haven't been able to work more
than a few hours a day. I collapse in bed and sleep much longer than eight hours
every night, and often feel like I could go for more if the sun didn't slap me
awake.

I've saved up enough where I could conceivably not work for a few months and be
fine. But then suddenly I think about the goals I have that require more than
I've saved (and potentially more than I could ever save in this brain state),
and I'm spurred back into some kind of zombified action.

Each spur gets progressively weaker, though. I'm seeing my passions and energy
become cracked shells as my body struggles to keep up with the pace I'm driving
it at. The worst thing is that I don't even feel like I'm going very fast or
doing very much - I'm just done.

I'm dubbing this feeling "bad resistance" - I'm resisting the good kind of
resistance. The kind that's been called "rest as resistance" - the foil to
capitalism. I kept thinking I was past this point of caring about the system in
place to keep us all muzzled and shackled. But my chains to capitalism keep
showing up in insidious ways.

I need to come up with a practice that will prevent me from constantly
tightening the ropes around myself, to the post that's keeping me in one place,
centered on one thing. The practice is just one step, but it's constantly the
hardest thing to do: just stopping. Staying still. No struggling. Submission.
Not to capitalism, or its nefarious counterparts, but to my body's desire to
experience stasis.

I've been experimenting with submission in other parts of my life, places where
I get to opt into it, instead of it happening to me. I don't think I need to
elaborate on _where_ I've been doing this, apart from saying I noticed how
much it's loosened me. How much it's let me feel held up - instead of held
down. How much it's let me take a backseat instead of always revving my internal
motor fast and hard to get to my end goals.

It's taken me until today, after a week of being in a triggered state and still
being unable to allow myself the peace I need to prevent a worse breakdown, to
understand what exactly is happening to me. How it's destroying who I am as a
person - how the society we live in is not meant for us to take the time to
nuture our best selves. Or even see the potentiality, what we could be.

After posting this, I'm going to read. I'm going to dance. I'm going to cook
nourishing food with friends. Most importantly, I'm going to take a
motherfucking snooze on this couch, no matter what time it is.
