---
title: "We Need to Talk About Transmasculinity"
date: 2024-01-24T14:22:57-05:00
draft: false
---

This is a word vomit after finishing [Leslie Feinberg's _Stone Butch
Blues_](https://www.lesliefeinberg.net). My hope is that it opens a discussion
around transmasculinity in general.

Yes, I know. I'm late to the game. It surprised me how many of my queer friends
have read _Stone Butch Blues_, knew of its existence, and yet until I came
across it in someone's bookshelf, it was never talked about. As if the presence
and influence of this book, especially in a transmasc's life, was assumed.

Because it damn well captures the essence of a transmasc experience, without
pulling a punch in the process, especially about the pain that goes into being
transmasculine. And further, it drives home how few stories there are about
transmasculinity.

This has struck me multiple times, especially when reading books in the leftist
radical space that often center the stories of women and femmes when confronted
with behaviors like sexual violence, unwanted attention, and even gaslighting.
I'm currently reading _Turn This World Inside Out_ by Nora Samaran which talks
about how nuturance culture is the inverse of rape culture.

Which is awesome - I highly recommend this book.

However, I have a huge critique on the first half of the book, which directs its
discussion of rape culture towards men and "masculine people" - in one of the
footnotes, this includes trans men and transmasculine people.

It's as if, because of the sheer nature of us taking testosterone, we've somehow
gone beyond the veil and have absorbed all the privileges of cis-manhood,
including the toxic traits.

...and suddenly forgot all of the horrorshow traumas of being socialized as
women, being subject to the _same exact behaviors_ (often for decades, depending
on when you transition) as those talked about in the book. 

Don't get me wrong, transmasculine people can absolutely absorb these behaviors,
but so can... queer people in general. Just read Carmen Maria Machado's [_In The
Dream House_](https://carmenmariamachado.com/in-the-dream-house) and you'll see
what I mean.

This dismissal, though, is outlined well in Feinberg's book:

The way that Jess, the main character was suddenly ejected from lesbian culture
because she decided to transition had faint echoes of this exact behavior. Her
butch counterparts experienced similar responses too as they either transitioned
or started dating other lesbians who were in the university-forward queer
spaces. These spaces, which reflect the culture of lesbianism at the time in
parallel rise with women's rights generally, emphasized that a lesbian was a
very specific kind of woman (i.e., no masculine traits whatsoever) and dated
other women without said masculine traits. Butches were frowned upon, almost as
being sellouts for being more masculine. Again, doubly worse (even in butch
community) if you took testosterone to medically transition.

When transmasc people transition, they still carry the well of trauma that goes
into (a) being fucking trans at all and (b) being treated in a shitty
manner by cis-men (and those who align themselves with patriarchal beliefs).

Suddenly, transmasc people have no place in any conversation: not in spaces
labeled for women, femmes, and nonbinary people; not in conversations about how
to address the privilege of cis-men (because we're now lumped into their
category a lot of the time...even if we _barely_ pass)...the question of
transmasculinity is left hanging like a loose thread.

The conversation of gender in Samaran's book is centered on transfeminity. And
rightfully so in a lot of respects - there's a lot of violence towards
transfeminine people that needs urgent discussion. However, to dismiss and
downplay the very real trauma and exclusion that transmasculine people feel only
emphasizes the work we have to do around understanding what masculinity actually
is.

Sophie Strand's _The Flowering Wand_ helped me process a lot of the stuff I'd
been feeling around my own masculinity: the desire to embrace my "softness" and
not turn to stone, the desire to be nurturing, to love openly, etc. I can still
do that because no one turned to me (apart from the dominant culture) and told
me I couldn't. I'm very lucky.

However, the question still remains about where transmasculine people fit in.
Part of me feels that, because we were often socialized as women first (for
varying degrees of our lives, and traumatically so), we don't know how (or are
afraid) to use our voice; we were taught to sit down and be quiet. We feel like
we shouldn't speak up because then we are just "acting like a dude" or
"mansplaining."

So we remain quiet to not have the tables turned on us for being too much like a
cis guy, who was socialized to think the world wants to hear is every little
thought about things he's not even an expert in. You know the type I'm talking
about. (It's my worst fear to be labeled like that, anyway.)

Generally, though, people just assume we have it easy because the hair and deep
voice automatically gives us privilege, but the reality is much more complex
than that.

Cis men usually smell it on me right away. I'm too short and petite, my voice
isn't pitched in the way they'd expect (I still emphasize a lot of words in the
way I was taught when socialized as a woman), and I don't fit in most men's
clothing. Thus, even though I've had top surgery and have been on testosterone
for well over a year, I'm still regularly misgendered, but even more dangerously
so now because it's clear I'm also not a cis-woman either.

I know that I am not alone in this. Some trans guys work out aggressively and
get "swole" to fill out the expected physique, which leads to the question of
our physical bodies (something that _a majority_ of trans people struggle with
to some degree):

The number of times I've gone on dates with cis-women who realize they are "too
straight" to date a transmasculine person is staggering. Usually it revolves
around the plumbing. Feinberg does an excellent job of highlighting this in a
particularly erotic scene where Jess goes stealth while on a date and has really
good sex with a cis-woman. Jess can't be open about their transness so has to
pretend to ejaculate with their strap-on outside of their date's body, because
they couldn't reveal that their dick wasn't "real."

I've had dates tell me directly that they don't think strap-ons feel "as good as
the real thing" - and this includes other trans people too. It's as if being
told no matter what we do, we will not be good enough.

And yet, this kind of discussion rarely gets attention. Transmasculine people
rarely have space to explain and feel out these complex emotions: that of
simultaneously being assumed to have privilege (and thus not needing support)
and that of regularly not being enough.

We're basically reproducing patriarchal society and instead of telling cis-men
they have to be silent and strong (which is how we're in this mess), we are
telling transmasculine people that they've betrayed everyone who wants to escape
patriarchal society and that they (still) need to sit down and shut up.

It's extremely worrying to me. I understand why it's happening - it's because
our dominant society still has the same patriarchal roles, and we live in it.
But come on, folks, we really gotta do better. The diversity of trans voices
needs to be heard otherwise we really are just making Capitalist
White-Supremacist Patriarchy 2.0. And I don't think anyone will survive that,
since we're barely surviving the first version.

There's a free version of _Stone Butch Blues_ on Feinberg's website as well as a
link to the print copy that's sold at cost. Highly recommend to start there and
to think about what other transmasculine stories need to be told.
